feat(eslint-plugin): [consistent-type-imports] ignore files with decorators, experimentalDecorators, and emitDecoratorMetadata (#8335)
typescript-eslint/typescript-eslint: packages/website/blog/2024-03-25-changes-to-consistent-type-imports-with-decorators.md

Reviewer: [Praise] Pretty much all my comments are on small narrative/proofreading things. The post overall is super clear and helped me come back into this. Nicely done!

---
authors:
  - image_url: /img/team/bradzacher.jpg
    name: Brad Zacher
    title: typescript-eslint Maintainer
    url: https://github.com/bradzacher
description: Changes to consistent-type-imports when used with decorators, experimentalDecorators, and emitDecoratorMetadata
slug: changes-to-consistent-type-imports-with-decorators
tags:
  [
    consistent-type-imports,
    experimentalDecorators,
    emitDecoratorMetadata,
    typescript-eslint,
  ]

> title: Changes to consistent-type-imports when used with legacy decorators and decorator metadata

Reviewer: Nit: other blog post titles are all capitalized.

```suggestion
title: Changes to `consistent-type-imports` with Legacy Decorators and Decorator Metadata
```

---

> We've made some changes to `consistent-type-imports` to fix some long-standing issues when used alongside `experimentalDecorators: true` and `emitDecoratorMetadata: true`. These changes increase safety and prevent invalid fixes when using decorator metadata.

Reviewer: A little convenience for folks:

```suggestion
We've made some changes to the [`consistent-type-imports` rule](/rules/consistent-type-imports) to fix some long-standing issues when used alongside `experimentalDecorators: true` and `emitDecoratorMetadata: true`. These changes increase safety and prevent invalid fixes when using decorator metadata.
```

<!-- truncate -->

## Experimental Decorator Metadata

> The `experimentalDecorators` compiler option (referred to as "legacy decorators" from here on) turns on support for an old version of the decorator proposal that was never standardized. Syntactically this proposal isn't too dissimilar to the current [Stage 3 proposal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators), however they differ in one major way - the use of [metadata reflection](https://rbuckton.github.io/reflect-metadata/) when `emitDecoratorMetadata` is turned on.

Reviewer: Some readers aren't likely to know what the compiler options are or even the difference between a compiler option and a TC39 proposal, I'd wager. Rewording a bit to introduce it first:

```suggestion
TypeScript's [`experimentalDecorators` compiler option](https://aka.ms/tsconfig#experimentalDecorators) (referred to as "legacy decorators" from here on) turns on support for an old version of the [JavaScript TC39 decorator proposal](https://github.com/tc39/proposal-decorators) that was never standardized. TypeScript's legacy decorators are similar to the current proposal, but differ in that they use [metadata reflection](https://rbuckton.github.io/reflect-metadata/) when TypeScript's [`emitDecoratorMetadata` compiler option](https://aka.ms/tsconfig#emitDecoratorMetadata) is turned on.
```

> When using legacy decorators with decorator metadata and a class is annotated with decorators TypeScript will emit runtime metadata for the class that captures the property types, method parameter types, and method return types. This metadata is incredibly powerful and provides a bridge between the types (which are elided at compile time) and the runtime code. However this runtime code is generated at a cost as it is derived using type information - meaning that the runtime code emitted changes based on the cross-file type information that TypeScript has computed.

Reviewer: Suggestion, I'd reword a bit to split up sentences and the paragraphs into two discrete points, and be slightly less flattering for the decorators:

```suggestion
When using legacy decorators with decorator metadata and a class is annotated with decorators, TypeScript will emit runtime metadata for the class. That decorator metadata will capture property types, method parameter types, and method return types. Decorator metadata provides a bridge between the types (which are not available at compile time) and the runtime code. 

The downside of generating this runtime code that it is derived using type information: meaning that the runtime code emitted changes based on the cross-file type information that TypeScript has computed. Doing so violates a key [TypeScript design goal](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript/wiki/TypeScript-Design-Goals) of not changing runtime behavior based on type information.
```

> When using legacy decorators with decorator metadata and a class is annotated with decorators TypeScript will emit runtime metadata for the class that captures the property types, method parameter types, and method return types. This metadata is incredibly powerful and provides a bridge between the types (which are elided at compile time) and the runtime code. However this runtime code is generated at a cost as it is derived using type information - meaning that the runtime code emitted changes based on the cross-file type information that TypeScript has computed.

Reviewer: > runtime metadata

I think many developers won't know what this means, so it'd be nice to have a brief mention... but I can't think of a good way to describe it 😬. Maybe a one sentence description around here? Maybe a small sketch of emitted JS after the TS snippet? Thoughts?

Author: Rewrote the end of the section to include the transpiled output.
I think it actually made things much clearer and more concrete! Before it was a little bit abstract.

To illustrate what this means consider the following snippet:

```ts
import Foo from 'foo';
import decorator from 'decorator';

class Clazz {
  @decorator
  method(arg: Foo) {}
}
```

If the imported name `Foo` resolves to...

- a type then TS will emit metadata that annotates `arg` with one of `Function`, `Object`, `String`, `Number`, or `Boolean` depending on what that type resolves to.
- an enum then TS will emit metadata that annotates `arg` with one of `String`, `Number`, or `Object` depending on the type of the enum's members.
- a class declaration:
  - and the import **_is NOT_** annotated as `import type` then TS will emit metadata that annotates the type of `arg` as `Foo`.
  - and the import **_IS_** annotated as `import type` then TS will emit metadata that annotates the type of `arg` as `Function`.

> 

Reviewer: I'm of the opinion it's good for narrative flow to end every section with a brief summation of the final point(s) that lead into the next one.

```suggestion

In addition to requiring runtime type information, those metadata emit rules are confusing for developers to reason about.
They necessitate understanding edge cases specific to TypeScript's handling of decorators and type information.

```

## `consistent-type-imports` caused runtime breakage

The important piece is that last dot point - the handling of imported names that resolve to class declarations. If the import is not annotated as `import type` then TS emits a runtime reference to the imported name. This runtime reference is implicit and requires type information to derive - you cannot derive its existence purely based on single-file AST analysis.

> The `consistent-type-imports` rule was introduced to allow users to enforce that any imported names are annotated as `import type` if they are not used in a value location. How the rule makes this decision is based on single-file AST analysis; it scans the code using a technique called scope analysis so that it can find all references to the imported names and determine if each reference is a value reference.

Reviewer: Devs reading this might not know what an AST is. And they don't need to in order to understand that it's a one-file-at-a-time thing. This is a good place to suggest they learn it though!

```suggestion
The `consistent-type-imports` rule was introduced to allow users to enforce that any imported names are annotated as `import type` if they are not used in a value location. How the rule makes this decision is based solely on the single file it's looking at.
It scans the code using a technique called "scope analysis" so that it can find all references to the imported names and determine if each reference is a value reference.

:::tip
See [ASTs and typescript-eslint](../asts-and-typescript-eslint) to understand how rules look at the syntax of files.
:::
```

Reviewer: Aside: I found it a little confusing to read through this. I think the point that `consistent-type-imports` tries to be an untyped rule tackling a typed problem isn't super clear immediately. This was a vague attempt at rewriting some of it:

> Where the `consistent-type-imports` rule used to trip up is around TypeScript's code emit including a runtime reference to any import not annotated as `import type`. That runtime reference is implicit and requires type information to derive. TypeScript needs to understand the type of the import to emit the metadata. But, `consistent-type-imports` was an untyped lint rule. It didn't have access to type information to know whether an import used as a decorator could be switched from `import` to `import type`!

However this solution had a hidden pitfall; if the user also used `isolatedModules: true` then TS will enforce that all imported types are explicitly marked as `import type` for compatibility with single-file build tools. This lead to an unresolvable situation where `consistent-type-imports` would enforce that an imported name _must not be_ marked with `import type` so that we could ensure we don't break decorator metadata, and simultaneously TS would enforce that that same imported name _must be_ marked with `import type`.

There have been a few attempts to fix this issue but the resolution we came to was that the only solution was to add type information to the rule so that it could correctly understand all of the above type-aware constraints. Adding type information to an existing rule is something we try to avoid because it is a major breaking change that restricts the rule to just users that leverage [type-aware linting](/getting-started/typed-linting).

> However we decided that adding type-information to the rule to handle this edge case was not a positive change for users or the ecosystem for two main reasons:

Reviewer: Being a little more precise here: we didn't decide reality, we just determined it.

```suggestion
Adding type-information to the rule to handle this edge case would not be a positive change for users or the ecosystem:
```

> 1. It requires a specific combinations of compiler options to trigger it means that not everyone is impacted by the problem - so we'd be preventing a lot of un-impacted users from using the rule.

Reviewer: I don't think the downsides of typed linting are mentioned previously?

```suggestion
1. Many users are unable to configure typed linting and/or unwilling to take its performance hit. Requiring typed linting for this rule to serve a very small subset of impacted users would reduce the linting ability of many more un-impacted users.
```

2. With the release of [TypeScript v5.0 and its stable decorators](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/release-notes/typescript-5-0.html#decorators) `experimentalDecorators` are now the legacy syntax. Whilst [TypeScript v5.2 added support for the latest stable decorator metadata proposal](https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/release-notes/typescript-5-2.html#decorator-metadata) this proposal does not include type metadata - so it doesn't suffer the same drawbacks as its legacy counterpart.

> ## The Final Solution

Reviewer: "Final" isn't a word that often holds up over time. We might end up changing this later.

There's also a pretty, ah, strong association with this specific phrase that I personally would prefer to avoid. 

How about...

```suggestion
## The Compromise
```

...or _"Today's Solution"_? _"Next"_? ...?

> Ultimately we decided the best solution was to just opt-out of handling this use-case entirely. This means that we can avoid accidentally reporting the wrong thing and fixing to code that either fails to compile or alters the emitted runtime metadata. To be clear this means that if you have **both** `experimentalDecorators: true` and `emitDecoratorMetadata: true` then rule will **_not_** report any errors within any files _that contain decorators_.

Reviewer: Nit: I think emphasizing visually with some separation does a bit better job of making something clear, without adding more words to read.

```suggestion
Ultimately we determined the best solution was to just opt-out of handling this use-case entirely. This means that we can avoid accidentally reporting the wrong thing and fixing to code that either fails to compile or alters the emitted runtime metadata. 

Now, if you have **both** `experimentalDecorators: true` and `emitDecoratorMetadata: true`, then the `consistent-type-imports` rule will **_not_** report any errors within any files _that contain decorators_.
```

All files without decorators will continue to report as expected. Similarly all projects that use `experimentalDecorators: false` and/or `emitDecoratorMetadata: false` will continue to report as expected.

> ### Configuring the Linter to expect `experimentalDecorators: true` and `emitDecoratorMetadata: true`

Reviewer: Nit: unnecessary capitalization?

```suggestion
### Configuring the linter to expect `experimentalDecorators: true` and `emitDecoratorMetadata: true`
```

When using legacy decorators with decorator metadata and a class is annotated with decorators, TypeScript will emit runtime metadata for the class (see the example below). That decorator metadata will capture property types, method parameter types, and method return types. Decorator metadata provides a bridge between the types (which are not available at compile time) and the runtime code.

The downside of generating this runtime code that it is derived using type information: meaning that the runtime code emitted changes based on the cross-file type information that TypeScript has computed. Doing so violates a key [TypeScript design goal](https://github.com/microsoft/TypeScript/wiki/TypeScript-Design-Goals) of not changing runtime behavior based on type information.

To illustrate what this means consider the following snippet:

```ts
import Foo from 'foo';
import decorator from 'decorator';

class Clazz {
  @decorator
  method(arg: Foo) {}
}
```

TypeScript will transpile this code to the following:

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
```ts

> var _a;

Reviewer: Nit: this isn't used later.

```suggestion
```

If TypeScript is producing an `_a` despite never using it, then that's a bug we can ignore.

Author: Oh nah it was there cos the code has no types so this is an extra case I (purposely) didn't mention. In this case when TS can't determine the type but it can see its a value-import - instead TS emits  `[typeof _a = (typeof Foo !== "undefined" && Foo) === "function" ? _a : Object]`. Which is some funky code-golf heh.

Can remove it though yeah as it's not necessary for the examples I'm mentioning.
